.TH GPP 1 "07 October. 1993" "VOPL 1.2"
.UC 4 
.SH NAME
gpp \- a program for plotting graphs
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B gpp
[
.B \-l<d>
] [
.B \-s <s1> <s2>
] [
.B \-r<fact>
] [
.B \-S
] [
.B \-P
]
.br
[
.B \-G
] [
.B \-c
] [
.B \-m<n>
] [
.B \-w<n>
] [
.B \-g
] [
.B \-p<n>
] [
.B \-L
]
.br
[
.B \-x xmin xmax
] [
.B \-y ymin ymax
] [
.B \-X
] [
.B \-Y
] [
.B \-Mx<n>
]
.br 
[
.B \-My<n>
] [
.B \-D
] [
.B \-f<fontname>
] [
.B \-d<device>
]
.B file or -

.SH DESCRIPTION
This program displays multiple graphs with various curve fitting
and axis options.
.\" Options mentioned in-line
The following options are available:

.TP
.B \-l<d>
Perform a least square fit of degree "d" on each curve.

.TP
.B \-s <s1> <s2>
Perform a cubic spline fit on each curve, with end 
.B slopes s1 and s2 
(Ie. a clamped spline)

.TP
.B \-r <fact>
Reduce (if fact < 1.0) or enlarge (if fact > 1.0) the entire plot.

.TP
.B \-S
Perform a cubic spline fit on each curve using a cardinal
spline and the 
.IR VOGLE(3) 
routine curve().
The end slopes are calculated as the tangent to the curve
formed by the lines connecting the first and second points
and the last and next to last points.

.TP
.B \-P
Perform a power equation fit on each curve.

.TP
.B \-G
Perform a saturated growth rate fit on each curve.

.TP
.B \-m<n>
Place a marker at every "n"th data point on each curve.

.TP
.B \-g<n>
Place a grid over the graph, with grid spacing of every nth tickmark.

.TP
.B \-p<n>
Draws only markers at every <n>th data point

.TP
.B \-L
Print legends if they are provided.

.TP
.B "\-x xmin xmax"
Specify absolute x scaling values. This option by-passes the
auto-scaling of the x-axis values.

.TP
.B "\-y ymin ymax"
Specify absolute y scaling values. This option by-passes the
auto-scaling of the y-axis values.

.TP
.B \-X
Draw the X-axis using a 
.IR logarithmic
scale.

.TP
.B \-Y
Draw the Y-axis using a 
.IR logarithmic
scale.

.TP
.B \-Mx<n>
Sets the number of minor tickmarks between (and including) major tickmarks 
along the X axis.

.TP
.B \-My<n>
Sets the number of minor tickmarks between (and including) major tickmarks 
along the Y axis.

.TP
.B \-D
Each trace is drawn with a different linestyle (up to seven linestyles are
available).

.TP
.B \-f<fontname>
Use font name fontname where fontname is any font available in the
.IR VOGLE(3)
library.

.TP
.B \-d<device>
Use the output device "device". These are the devices compiled
into the
.IR VOGLE(3)
library. Some examples are: postscript, hpgl, tek, sun etc.

.TP
.B file
The name of the input file. If it is a minus '-' stdin is assumed.
.LP
The input file contains two lines at the
type which describe the graph. The first line gives the title, and
the second line the type. At the moment the only type supported is
"xy". The axes titles appropriate to the type of the graph are on the
lines following the type statement. After the axes titles the first
legend title is given followed by an axes descriptor on the next line.
gpp then reads in points appropriate to the axes descriptor until it
reaches a plot statement. This tells it to save the current points as a
seperate plot. It then looks for another legend followed by an axes
statement, and the cycle continues. Legends and titles may be blank
lines.
.nf

	A title for the graph
	type xy
	A title for the x-axis
	A title for the y-axis
	legend for the first plot
	axes xy
	x y
	x y 
	. .
	. .
	plot xy
	legend for the second plot
	axes x
	x
	x
	. 
	.
	plot xy

.SH FILES
/usr/local/lib/hershey/* 	Font files.
.SH SEE ALSO
.IR VOGLE(3),
.IR VOPL(3).
.SH BUGS
There are too many options.
There may be only 1024 points per trace.
Interpretation of Endslopes for splines when using logarithmic
scalings is Sketchy.

